# Dynamic Clustering Visualization Tool

This Python script dynamically visualizes the partitioning clustering process using the K-Means algorithm, providing an educational foundation for those learning or debugging clustering techniques. Using a straightforward 2-dimensional Euclidean distance measure, the script demonstrates the iterative clustering process in real-time through `matplotlib` visualizations. Notably, the project does not integrate sum of squared errors as it was not a requirement for this tool, keeping the focus on core clustering mechanics.

Users can input data points and cluster centers (centroids) either manually or automatically, with the option to view clustering iterations through interactive keyboard controls. This tool is ideal for those entering the domain of unsupervised learning, as K-Means is one of the fundamental algorithms in this field.

To ensure optimal usage, place both `main.py` and `creatingInputs.py` in the same directory.

## Features

Key features of this project include:

- **Dynamic Visualization**: Watch the clustering process unfold in real time.
- **Interactive Graph**: Navigate through different iterations of the clustering process.
- **Manual/Automatic Data Input**: Choose to manually input data points and clusters or generate them automatically. Alternatively, have the `creatingInputs.py` file present in the same directory to enable file input using automatically created input files. If you so wish as well, follow the guide below to create your own input file.
- **Color Optimization**: Each cluster is represented with a distinct color for better visualization based on maximally distant [CIELAB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIELAB_color_space) color values.
- **Interactive Visualization with Keyboard Controls**: Navigate through iterations of clustering using keyboard arrows:
  - Left Arrow ⬅️: Move to the previous iteration.
  - Right Arrow ➡️: Move to the next iteration.
- **Automatic Installation**: Just run the script and all requirements will automatically be installed so you'll never have an issue with missing packages in either your main environment or in your virtual environment if you are using one.

## Usage

Run the script using Python:

```bash
python main.py
```

NOTE: The script automatically installs all required libraries and packages by creating a "requirements.txt" file with required non-built-in packages then uses pip to install them.

### Data Input

You will be prompted to choose the input method for data points and clusters.

- File Input: Load data points and clusters from a file.

> NOTE: This option is only available if there exists a "creatingInputs.py" file in the directory as this script is automatically run to generate sample inputs that are compatible with the file input format.

- Manual Input: Input each data point and cluster center in the format x,y.
- Automatic Input: Automatically generate a specified number of data points and clusters.

### Keyboard Controls in Visualization

- Left Arrow ⬅️: Move to the previous iteration.
- Right Arrow ➡️: Move to the next iteration.

## Input File Format

There are 2 aspects to defining an input file:

- Name
- Format

### Name

The name of the file must be:

```Text
input-{}.txt
```

Where the "{}" part can be replaced with any value you wish. A few examples are `input-1.txt` or `input-sample-1.txt`

### Format

If you choose to load data from a file, the format should be as follows:

```text
<number_of_clusters>
<number_of_points>
<cluster_1_x> <cluster_1_y>
...
<cluster_n_x> <cluster_n_y>
<point_1_x> <point_1_y>
...
<point_m_x> <point_m_y>
```

## Installation

The script is designed to handle [dependencies](#dependencies) automatically, so users do not need to manually install packages. Upon running `main.py` file, the script generates a `requirements.txt` file with all required libraries, if it doesn’t already exist. It then uses `pip` to install them automatically, ensuring compatibility within your global or virtual environment. Afterwards, sample input files are generated by the automated running of `creatingInputs.py`, which facilitates testing and experimentation with different data configurations.

## Dependencies

- `matplotlib`
- `colormath`
- `numpy` (used in generating sample input files only)
- `scikit-learn` (used in generating sample input files only)

These dependencies are listed in requirements.txt that will be generated automatically if it doesn't exist and these packages will be installed automatically.

> NOTE: This tool was built and tested with `Python 3.10`

## Authors

- Fatima AlZahra AlHasan 🧠 - 20-0510
- Mike Hanna ✨ - 19-0743
